I think what drew me to the subject initially was the desire to write a book about the American home front during the war.
And on that score, at least I knew that there hadn't really been a lot of books written.
There had been some wonderful essay books about the home front, one by John Blum,
at Yale and another one by Richard Lingaman, but they were topical.
Civil rights, women in the factory, mobilization.
And there really hadn't been a study of Roosevelt's leadership during the war on the home front.
I mean, most books invariably just go right into the war itself.
So at least I knew I was carving out an area within Roosevelt.
enormous literature that had been relatively not done and when i went to the roosevelt library the first time this wonderful man who's now retired but was the roosevelt library director and i said do you think i can do this or has this already been done and he was so supportive he said no it hasn't been done you got to do it so that offered me at least when i started i had no idea when i started it would become the story it became about franklin and eleanor and all the people in the white house that emerged through the research
which gave it another angle, hopefully, that hadn't been really focused on before.
You mentioned Eleanor and Franklin, of course, and you also mentioned a young Joe Lash, and he has written that book, Eleanor and Franklin.
So it really had to be kind of a gutsy thing for you to... I think, in fact, it's interesting because...
Years ago, I think I had thought about doing something on Eleanor Roosevelt just because of how much I respected and admired and wanted to know more about her, but was daunted by the fact that Lash's book was out there.
So it was really only when I came up with this particular period of time, which only occupies a few chapters in Lash's book, that I knew that it would be a new angle on the thing.
You mentioned the Usher diary, among many other things.
Tell me about
the kinds of materials that were fresh and that were new that allowed you, that enabled you to do a fresh work.
Well, what made the Usher's Diaries so important is, and they exist in the Roosevelt Library, but I think what happens is if you use them in the library, it takes so much time to copy down everything that's in the page of the library that you probably only use them sporadically, I think, as maybe some other scholars have.
When I saw how wonderful they were documenting every minute, Roosevelt awakens at 7.10, you know, massage at 7.20, breakfast at so-and-so, lunch with somebody.
Once I knew, for example, he had lunch with Stimson, I could go to Stimson's diary for that day, or if it was Icky's or Morgenthau, and they would describe what happened at that lunch that day.
Once I knew that he had met with somebody for dinner who might have had a memoir written about them, I could go to that.
It was almost like the building block of creating what life was like for these people over this five-year period.
And what happened is I just bought the Usher's Diaries.
I mean, it turns out it's like $200.
It's not this huge investment.
And we rented a microfiche reader so that we actually could, I mean, my research assistant and I typed out these huge chronologies that told every Usher's Diary what it did every single day.
So that it just became the way of knowing where else to go.
It was almost like the first understanding that let me know what other resources to go to.
And you were actually able to reconstruct
reliably, almost to the point of documenting it.
Very early on, you had Eleanor coming home, and Franklin's in the room talking to... Right, right, right.
Well, you know, that's an interesting example.
When I was in California for the year, when Dick was getting the quiz show made, we had dinner one night with Billy Wilder, the director of Billy Wilder of Sunset Boulevard, and he's the one who told me the story about Helen Cahagan Douglas, and he thought it was the night that Germany had invaded Western Europe.
um that's what the story had come down to him over the years but you never know for sure is that right and i was so excited when i saw in the usher's diary tell him to hagan douglas sleeping there at that actual life so it just it i think what it made me able to do it's not speculative that's right i mean we can talk about it later but when i got to lucy mercer coming back into the story up until this time no one's quite known when she reappeared they know he was she was with him when he died
They knew she was with him back in 1918, but some people assumed he was having an affair with her all of his life.
Some people didn't know when she came in or out.
That's right.
When I looked at the Usher's Diaries, though, I could see exactly when she returned to have dinner with him and know what he was doing the rest of that day so you can give it a little substance and context.
So I think that was the first thing that allowed a new look at it.
Were you hopeful that you could shade any, give any news?
insight into the characters, the character of the principals?
Well, I think what was lucky and what happened is that to the extent that I would define the principal characters as
not only Franklin and Eleanor but Missy LaHand and the daughter Anna Roosevelt and Harry Hopkins I mean it's amazing that he moved in I know maybe I'd known that but I'm so glad I mean the whole idea I had not ever absorbed that they're all living there you know the picture of Winston Churchill padding around in the middle of the night and was that known by the way I don't think so I mean certainly nobody knew that Lorena Hickok was living there she deliberately kept that secret
And people knew at the time that Harry was there, but I don't think people ever put together before that they were all there at the same time.
And what turned out to make, I hope, some new looks at all those people were a series of lucky interviews, in a sense.
What happened is Chip O'Neil, it turned out, had lived in Somerville, not far from his Cambridge Somerville, from Missy Lehan, where she grew up.
So he got me to find some of Missy's relatives.
And Missy had never been fully created as a character before.
It's interesting, when you read the works about Roosevelt, there's testament in those works, like Rosenman's speech-writing book about Roosevelt and Frankfurter's memoirs.
They will say Missy was one of the most indispensable people to Roosevelt and that her death was catastrophic to him and that she was not only a secretary and a companion, but shrewd and an important advisor.
And I think because she was a secretary, she had been discounted in some ways.
Anyway, because of Chip, I found one group of Missy's relatives
and then was able to go to Connecticut to interview her grandniece who had this trunk in the attic that she'd had for all these years that had all of this stuff of Missy's in it.
It was so exciting.
You can imagine.
She brought down the trunk and it had letters that Missy had written.
It had all the inaugural and all the addresses Roosevelt had ever given when she gave a copy up to Missy, to Missy, who I couldn't have done this without.
And then I describe it only shortly in the book, but my favorite moment in that whole interview is the death that she had in a bed, beautiful furniture that they had saved from her.
And that's when I said to them, but I know the most important thing to her, because I had read her will, was this hanging bookcase that Roosevelt had made for her, which she decreed in her will.
that she wanted to go to one of her nieces because she valued it so much because she had made it.
And all of a sudden this woman says to me, oh my God, you know, there was such a bookcase and it was in my brother's garage.
And we had this feeling that there might be a story behind it, but it was really ugly.
And we sold it in a garage sale.
It was just one of those moments where you say, no, bring it back.
I know.
And unfortunately the person who got it has no idea what's going on.
Exactly, exactly.
But so that was really helpful.
And then
And then once I knew that Anna Roosevelt was going to be important to me, because, again, from the Usher's Diaries, I knew that she lived there that last year and a half, I was able to talk at long length to her three children, especially her daughter, her oldest daughter.
Well, you're really getting people at the end.
Oh, yeah.
I mean, some of the people that you were so fortunate enough to know.
Well, I mean, Alonzo Fields, the butler at the White House, the black butler, died just about six months or so ago.
And he's the one who, he was there actually through Hoover, through Roosevelt, through Truman.
And he had a fabulous memory.
And he lived in Medford, Massachusetts.
And again, I had no idea he was still alive.
Chip O'Neill one time I'm with him said, have you interviewed Alonzo?
He of course knows all these people.
I said, Alonzo's alive?
I mean, I knew who he was.
Oh, he was great.
I knew that he'd been there because I'd heard of him.
And he had long ago written a book, but the book was written with somebody else and didn't have anywhere near the kind of incredible detailed memories about the Roosevelt administration because his book had to cover all of this stuff.
But I had no idea he was alive.
So I went to see him and had this incredible time at his house.
And he's the one who told me about that first night that Churchill came to the White House when he overheard Eleanor and Franklin arguing because Eleanor was saying, he didn't even tell me he was coming.
What's the matter with you?
And then Churchill yelling at him the next morning and saying there were certain ground rules to be followed the next three weeks that he was going to be there.
No whistling in the corridor.
He had to have wine every morning for breakfast.
He had to have 90-proof brandy for drinks at night.
And Alonzo said he wasn't even angry about it.
It was like a drill sergeant.
He thought it was fine establishing the ground rules.
And he told me some other wonderful things.
And then I got to...
the doctor who was with roosevelt when he died he was 95 years old wow and he lives down in in new york so i went to these people well i didn't get to alonzo until the middle of it all because i didn't really know about it i know i mean i what happened is i had called a friend of mine who was a doctor um and he i knew he might know through the medical establishment how to find out if this guy was still alive and he found out for me that he was alive and where he was living and so i found him
Was he able to do you anything?
Yeah, I mean, he's the one who told me that, I mean, see, the things that, I mean, he had written an article about Roosevelt's medical condition in the Journal of Medicine a long time ago, so I had that, so I'm not sure I learned anything new about his actual medical condition, but the kind of things he was able to talk to me about, which I thought were really valuable, was the fact that Eleanor didn't really accept that he was dying, that he could see that she just kept...
wanting him to do things and be places and it wasn't because she was being mean to him but because she just hadn't um willed into her mind that he was really dying she kept thinking he'd get better and he described this one scene that's in the book of her calling him she's been told that nobody's supposed to bother him at a certain time when he's when he's going down to warm springs to relax and she called him three times about a minor issue you know and she's and he was upset with her at that time
And then he also described the difference that Anna somehow saw that her father was dying, and that's why she could give him the relaxation, and that's probably why he took her to Yalta instead of Eleanor.
So that kind of...
understanding of the dynamics of the relationships I couldn't have gotten without somebody who was thinking about Roosevelt's health and how it affected the mother and the daughter.
This is just about it, really.
I can't imagine any future writer or biographer having access to any people with any meaningful reflection of it.
If I tried to do it ten years later, it would have been impossible.
So that's what made it fun.
I mean, it really was.
Were there any epiphanous moments for you?
I mean, any moments of great discovery?
Well, you know, I think when I went out, I saw Jimmy and Elliot before they died, the two Roosevelt boys.
They both died, too.
That's the end of the Roosevelt children.
And I think when Jimmy told me the story of...
His father essentially asking his mother to be his wife again in September of 42 after Missy had had her stroke and after his mother Sarah had died when he was so lonely.
that he needed Eleanor more as a companion even than as a political partner.
And Ginny believed that what he was asking her was essentially to be his wife again in all aspects.
In other words, let's come back together.
And the terrible dilemma put Eleanor in, knowing that she loved him, knowing that he was lonely without Missy and his mother, but also knowing that she couldn't let herself be so vulnerable to hurt again, so that she eventually...
without necessarily saying no, but asked him if he could go on another trip to England, which meant rejecting his plea.
I found that what was so important about that story was it showed me most people have assumed that by this time in their life, their marriage has just sort of removed itself to a totally unemotional plane, and they're just partners.
And I had inklings of feelings even before talking to Jimmy about that moment.
that there was a lot more going on between them.
Because I could see the letters, I could see her disappointments at times when she was waiting for him or he was waiting for her.
But that confirmed for me that almost what I think I've tried to portray, that they keep missing each other.
You know, one wants the other and the other one's not there.
But that meant that their relationship was still alive and open to hurt and to need.
There are certain personality things that are never going to change, like one of the kids says, you just wish your mother would lighten up every once in a while.
That's right.
I mean, I think their temperaments were opposite from the very beginning.
I mean, my argument is, at least just the way I think about it, that that's partly what drew them together in the beginning, because you sometimes do fall in love with those opposite traits.
And I think he saw her principled ethical side, and she was much more serious than all those debutante girls he knew.
And he had that serious side, obviously, underneath his own playboy side.
Had he enjoyed a good time.
That's right.
And I think what happened over time was that he teased her that she had a backbone that never bent.
And he needed to relax.
I mean, the one thing I think that was hardest for him about Eleanor was that because of his polio, the only way he could relax was to talk, to have cocktails, to gossip.
And he couldn't play tennis, he couldn't play golf.
He had to have that kind of relaxation.
And that kind of small talk was the hardest thing for her.
She was never at ease with it, nor was she at ease with cocktails because of her alcoholic father.
And she couldn't stop working.
She couldn't stop bringing up civil rights in the middle of that cocktail hour or picking the film and making it a film about rapes of wrath or something like that.
And I don't even blame her.
I think she had never learned how to play.
I mean, that was absent from her childhood.
She once said way at the end of her life that she would have given anything to have learned how to flirt.
But she hadn't learned those things.
And in a bizarrely ironic kind of way, I mean, her discovery of the affair with Mercer almost did liberate her in a way, didn't it?
Oh, I have no question.
I mean, I think given what a woman faced in 1918, especially someone like Eleanor, who was not fulfilled fully by her role as a wife and mother because she had so much trouble bringing up her kids.
She'd never been mothers herself.
and Sarah was an ever-present figure in that triangle.
When the fear happened, it freed her to go outside that smaller environment and find that she had this incredible range of skills in the outside world, in public speaking and organizing and fighting for issues, and she became a much more confident person than she'd been, and had that not happened,
she wouldn't have had that door open to her.
Oh, can you imagine?
It's everybody's worst nightmare.
I mean, I think that's got to be, because I think everybody can empathize with what she must have experienced when she saw those letters.
Have those letters been destroyed or have they been destroyed?
The only letter that anyone knows of, any full letter, there's a couple little notes that exist from Lucy, it's the one that's printed at the end of the book that she writes to Anna.
So, somebody had said, Madame Shumatov claimed, Lucy's friend, that Lucy burned all of his letters after he died.
Possibly.
Yeah, maybe.
Maybe they're somewhere, but possibly, yes.
What do you think they tell us that you don't already know?
I don't know.
I mean, I think, I mean, what the letter to Anna was helpful for was just showing that she was a really substantial person, Lucy, and sensitive and perceptive about the relations of the family.
And I thought so diplomatic about saying, forgive me for talking of these things because I am an outsider and your father's just died, but I thought you'd want to know how much he loved you and how he talked about you to me all the time.
And then again, when Anna's daughter, Eleanor Seagraves, told me that Anna kept that letter in her bedtime side table all her life because it validated the kind of father-daughter relationship and also validated how special Lucy was, which made her decision...
to bring them together, a viable one rather than a betraying one.
And you certainly point out, and this is something that you said, I thought so eloquently on the Today Show the other day, I mean, you really, these four women at one time, I don't think I'd ever, I mean, I've read any other books on FDR and the family, but
I mean, these four people there, almost the mother, the daughter, the wife.
You might talk a little bit about that.
Actually, one other question while I think about it.
That is a half a century, actually, since he's gone.
And I think you actually are able now, with this patented time, to define the nature of the relationship perhaps more
in greater detail than it's ever more perspective perhaps than it's been done before.
No, I mean, I think it may be true that, I mean, certainly at the time, there's such emotions swirling around, an independent woman who is the wife of the President of the United States, and in some ways watching Eleanor live the rest of her life out after his death and knowing that she came to terms with his life and with the sadness he had caused to her
and somehow incorporated him into herself.
I mean, my sense is in those last 17 years of her life, she became a more practical politician because she no longer had to be the idealistic half against his pragmatic half.
She became both.
Seeing all of that helps to, from the 50-year vantage, helps to see, I think, what role he played and what role she played that you might not have seen right up close.
I think that's probably right.
And a corollary to that is, after 50 years, it is amazing how...
resonant that relationship is i mean this isn't something that's ephemeral no that's right this is something that'll that'll be as long as american history is studied i think oh i think so too i mean i i i mean it certainly seems like i think in terms of the two of them i mean franklin roosevelt has got to be if not the certainly one of the most important figures in american history in the 20th century
And she's probably one of the most important women in the 20th century in American life.
I mean, my recollections are of her.
I'm 51 now.
And I remember my mother and my aunt being, you know, great elderly people.
Supporters of my father being the Republic.
But I remember...
Eleanor Roosevelt, they used to introduce her as the first lady of the world.
Right, exactly right.
That's exactly right.
And boy, if she said, I, by Adelaide, she took this very seriously.
That's right.
No, she had a real following.
This isn't like the Reagan supporting Dan Quayle or something like that.
No, no, I understand.
Exactly, that's right.
There's a wonderful moment, actually, which is not in the book because it was past my time.
Somebody told me the story that she was with Adlai Stevenson once in Harlem, and all sorts of blacks were hammering to get in the car and talk to him, and he didn't know what to do, and he just sat there.
And she told somebody she knew then, as much as she loved him, that he didn't have—FDR would have rolled the windows down, had his arms out everywhere.
It was a really interesting—she just saw it at that moment.
And just to the side as well, I remember one of my interviews with Rob Brady, he said, as much as he loves Stevenson, he said, there were a lot of unread books in his library.
Wow.
I mean, the egghead thing.
Exactly.
But a lot of it was interesting.
That's interesting.
He said, there were a lot of unread books in his library.
I've never used a quote.
Yeah, it's a wonderful quote, yeah.
You might ask him.
Yeah, that's terrific.
Anyway, you were about to know about four women.
Oh, the other four women.
Oh, what was so much fun, um,
Tell me about the influence of women in his life, just a softball down the middle.
Well, I mean, what I found so fascinating to research was that in a certain sense, you had almost every kind of woman's role surrounding him.
I mean, obviously the mother who remains critical to him the rest of her life, and she's a very big figure.
I mean, the fact that she lives and only dies four years before him and is almost with him from the beginning until the end,
with both the strengths and the weaknesses that that kind of intrusive mother brings.
I mean, they move in.
They move in, and she literally... I know, I always tease my kids about the story of MacArthur's mother coming to West Point and looking to see if his light was on when he was studying.
Sarah felt nothing intrusive about coming up to Boston to take that townhouse when he's at Harvard or, I mean, incredibly buying double townhouses for them in New York.
And, I mean, there's some real tough times for Eleanor.
She decorates the Eleanor Franklin part, and there's that moment when Eleanor just starts crying because she feels that none of this is my own.
And yet she gave him the confidence that made him what he was.
So that is a critical component of who he is.
I think maybe it's possible that her intrusiveness made it difficult for him to have the kind of intimacy that people always kept wanting with him.
I don't really deal with this at great length, but perhaps just the guilt he might have felt when he was young about falling in love with anyone else besides his mother made him have to keep private anything else that wasn't okay with the mother.
But still, she's a huge figure.
And Eleanor, obviously the wife, you've got this incredibly interesting role with a wife who...
not only plays the idealistic half to the pragmatic politician and is able to argue for making sure that the war is a vehicle for social reform as well as
be able to beat the Axis powers.
But she's his conscience.
She's his eyes and ears traveling around the country.
She's his best reporter.
That was very interesting.
I loved it.
The man is physically unable to dwell.
That's right.
There's somebody you can trust.
And how many presidents really have someone?
I mean, he had Harry Hopkins on the foreign policy side eventually and Eleanor at home.
And as one of, I think it was Francis Perkins said,
What she brought back was not just facts, but insights.
And she could tell him, this program's not working and this is wrong in a way that so few people could have done that with a president.
And he really understood things because of her.
And those tricks she took are amazing.
And when you think of her, you know, suddenly, I mean, my favorite story is that one where the migrant worker in his shack suddenly looks up without surprise after she's trekked over in the mud and said, oh, hello, Mrs. Roosevelt.
You know, today Hillary would be followed by 700 reporters and it wouldn't work.
But then, of course, you have the role of the secretary.
You know, we obviously know throughout history how important secretaries can be to working men.
Well, you quote her.
She just blew a quote.
What a thing to have somebody who knows precisely what you want to say in a letter.
Exactly, exactly.
She said she studied his style of thinking and writing well enough that she could become him in it, certainly.
And also, I mean, the part I found so important was her understanding when he was grouchy during the day, you know, and arranging those poker games at night so that he could relax without him even knowing.
She'd just say, here they all are to play poker.
I mean, that shows you really know your boss well.
Or, you know, being willing, as people said, you know, he's in the middle of some really important meeting, and she makes him put a sweater on because he's cold, or he's getting a cold, or take his medicine, or she paid his bills.
She sent the draperies out for dry cleaning, and, you know, at springtime, she gave the kids their allowances.
I mean, she really was playing the role of the wife when Eleanor traveled.
And then, of course, there's the daughter, but go ahead.
Give me a comment on the daughter.
Well, what I found so interesting about that was here's a daughter who, I guess, all of her life as a child had wanted to be close to her father and found politics, a force that took her away from her father.
I mean, she has that image of childhood standing out, you know, of wanting to be in that smoke-filled room with her father and all those men and not being allowed in.
And in part, maybe that sense of estrangement is what drew her closer to her mother, and her mother had eventually confided in her, the story of Lucy Mercer.
And you can see in most of the story, until she actually moves into the White House, that it's the mother-daughter relationship that's closer than the father-daughter relationship.
And even during that whole time when Anna's so mad that she doesn't get to go to the Turan conference, and John Bodiger is there, and... Oh, no, I guess it's the... I forget now which one.
I think it is Turan.
And she feels like her brothers have gotten better chances than she, and she commiserates with her mother because the mother didn't go either.
But then when she finally gets to the White House and is able to give her father that gossip, I mean, she says in her letter to Johnny Bottiger, her husband, that the turning point came when she was able to just sort of gossip with him about the fact that Franklin Jr.
was...
was having a crush on Kay Summersbee, the woman that Eisenhower was with, and then FDR confides in her that he thinks Eisenhower is having an affair with Kay Summersbee.
I mean, you just love these moments that you would never find if you didn't have those letters.
And I was lucky enough, again, that
Because I had interviewed early on Eleanor Seagraves, Anna's oldest daughter, she's the one that gave me access to all the private material at the library that hasn't been used of the Baudigar letters and of Anna's unpublished material, so that you could get inside Anna's head as much as possible with documentation.
Are there any things that are still embargoed or is most of the material pretty much available?
I would say most of it's available.
Every now and then when you're in a file,
They'll have a colored slick that says, you know, this thing is not here.
So you don't even know why it's not there.
But in that library, it's probably more than many others because it's the oldest one.
Although Hoover now has one too, but I think most of it is also does.
But it's not.
But what happens is in order to have permission to use it, you have to get... What happens is people have given over their materials to the library.
And you can read it, but if you want to quote from it, you have to get permission from the owners of it, and that's not the library often.
So that's why I had to go to Harold Vicki's son and had to go to True to Lash, Joe's wife, to the Joe Lash Library.
and um and to add his children to get all that material i had to do that at columbia with an oral history oh yeah and surprisingly enough the guy that owned it was the guy who did the interview oh no kidding yeah that can happen sometimes it was crazy yeah i know i didn't even realize until the last couple months that all of this took you know had to happen i thought it was in the library
You could use it.
Oh, no.
So luckily I had known all these people.
But these oral histories are wonderful, I think, because you use it.
I'll tell you, Francis Perkins' Oral History at Columbia, it's like eight volumes, more than a thousand pages.
Amazing stuff that's in it.
Oh, it's wonderful.
What a great idea.
Oh, yeah, you really do.
I mean, and then I used all the ones that were relevant in the Roosevelt Library.
I mean, because what happens is somebody with, what you do is once you know you're going to have a certain...
situation like the draft or land lease or you know one of the struggles over civil rights or women in the factory then all these oral histories will somebody will have been with Eleanor Franklin when one of those things came up and it's the only way you're going to be able to get often if you don't have a letter or a diary entry what they're feeling about a certain issue and they were there you know and even if it's sometimes you know they mix up things it's still it's a wonderful for us let's let's integrate this with with
the other books that you've done.
Clearly there's a pattern here, and there's a focus of interest.
Maybe tell me a little about what you've written.
I'm sure it's not coincidental that you've written about the families and the free Democrat president.
Well, Nixon would be interesting to write about if I had been able to interview him.
I mean, in fact, at one point... Oh, what's his name?
Pat Buchanan, right?
Yeah.
Pat Buchanan and I were on a White House Dallas Commission together and got to know each other a little bit.
And long ago, you know, he said he'd put in a word with the Nixon people.
But I think probably that, you know, the fact that my husband had worked for Kennedy in the Nixon campaign, it wasn't going to be me he was going to talk to.
But I think there's probably, you know, in addition to that...
I think part of it was having gotten to know Lyndon Johnson when I was young.
There's my husband.
Hello.
Did you do it already?
All right.
How are you?
This is Dick Goodwin.
This is Dickie Watley.
That's right.
So you did it already.
I think in some ways the experience of having
the incredible fortune of getting to know Lyndon Johnson.
Okay, that's right.
I mean, what happened is that I ended up being a White House fellow assigned to the White House.
I'd been involved in the anti-war movement, so it became sort of a controversy that an anti-war person had been assigned to work in the White House House program.
And instead of kicking me out of the program, which people thought he would, Johnson said, just have her come down here for a year, and if I can't win her over, no one can or something.
So in the end, it drew him, in a certain sense, into a relationship with me where I spent my White House fellow a year in Washington, and I ended up staying on the White House staff for him for six months, and then I helped him on his memoirs over the next five years.
While I started teaching at Harvard, I went to the ranch summers, Christmas vacations, and about every third weekend or so.
So I was only 24, 25, 26 at the time.
And I saw him not at the height of his power, but really in that vulnerable last stage of his life.
And it meant he talked to me privately in a way that he never would have had time or inclination to do, I think, if it had been at the height of his power.
But I think looking back on it now, because I was able to wake up in the morning and find him needing to talk to me at 5.30 or...
or his asking me to sit outside his room when he had a nap because he was lonely and he wanted to know if somebody was there, it made me see the private side of a figure and not just think of them as presidents without inner turmoil, troubles, needs, wants, and desires that I probably brought with me to my book on him and the Kennedys.
That's basically the focus of yours.
That's right.
So that I think...
And I don't know that I fully... Very relevant.
Yeah, I guess, I think so.
I mean, I think if you, you know, there would be times even with Johnson when suddenly I remember being in his study one day and he had all the presidential bibliography in his study.
He had all these books on presidents, chronological.
And then suddenly I went, oh my God, he's one of them.
And then I sort of got chilled back in a certain minute and thinking, how can I be so friendly with him?
You know, he's a president.
Now this was in Texas?
This was in Texas when I'm 24 years old or something.
But then...
He was at the ranch.
He had it in his study there when he had all these books.
Because normally your feeling is that there's something distant.
You've read about these presidents all your life.
And it would be hard to approach them and try to find out what they're feeling at certain times.
But because, except for those few moments when I'd be brought up short and realize, oh my God, I'm just talking to him relaxably as if he's my friend, and he's one of them, most of my experience was to just know him as a private person.
So it didn't intimidate you?
No, it didn't.
And I think it was partly because I was so young it didn't intimidate me.
You just sort of think, oh, this is natural.
But looking back on it now, I realize how special it was.
And I do think it just allowed me, when I got into the later books, to know that
Other people knew him like I knew Johnson, and I'm going to find those people, and they can tell me what's happening somehow.
And if that hadn't happened, I don't know that my focus would have been the same.
I was originally a political scientist.
I got my PhD in political science from Hawkins.
Where are you from?
From Long Island, New York.
So I think that was important.
I think that just made me want to know these people.
I'm sure the scientists must have a biographical thing that they can say.
Yeah, I'm sure they do.
I don't want to ask you all these questions that they can do.
When you start a book, do you bring any kind of preconceptions into it, any baggage, any...
Clearly, you wouldn't write about somebody you didn't like, I don't think.
You call it a sympathetic... Well, it's interesting.
I've thought about that.
I mean, I think I know how long it takes me to write these books.
I mean, embarrassingly, this one takes me longer to write than it took the war to be fought.
It took six years.
It would be hard to spend that much time.
And you really do feel there are times when I would be talking to these people during the day.
I mean,
They're alive for you.
They are totally alive.
I mean, Franklin, Eleanor, Harry, Anna, you know, especially because I had this research assistant who worked with me the whole time through.
We would talk about them as if this is what they've done today.
That's right, exactly.
So that it would be really hard.
I mean, it makes it much more pleasant to have this basic respect and affection for these people, even though there are times when you're going to criticize them, times when they fail, like all human beings.
I don't know what it would be like to suppose you did something on somebody like Hitler or Stalin.
I suspect the fascination of that kind of large evil would sustain you.
What I'd have a hard time doing would be to write about somebody who was not that large and who I just disliked.
I mean, that would be horrible because they do affect your life.
I mean, you know, there's something about sometimes watching Eleanor
able to reinvent herself when she had to and change after that affair take place to become a different person to go out more.
When I was worrying about the fact that my kids were reaching the age where they were all going to be going off to college, we just have one left at home, I kept thinking, well, I'll figure something out to do, you know, beyond staying home and just writing, or maybe I will be able to, because Eleanor was able to do it.
They do hit you in certain ways.
Certainly when I was doing the Kennedy book,
which was about a family.
There would be times when my kids were little at that point, and I would try and import the ritual from the Kennedy book into my kids' lives, like we'd try to have dinner conversations at night.
It never seemed to work.
One time my kids were in camp, and Rose used to write these incredibly long political letters to her kids at camp, Joe and Jack, when they were like seven and eight.
My kids were the same age.
I'd write them about Oliver North and Rand Contrahealing, and they'd say, Mom, what's happened to you?
So it does affect you.
I mean, so that's why, at least for me,
since you're going to be living with these people day in and day out for a long time, it ennobles your life if they're larger and people that you respect so much that you want to empathize with them.
I mean, I've talked to David McCullough and Justin Kaplan.
I think he was going to do Picasso or something.
He wrote me the most wonderful, I mean, he's such a wonderful man.
He not only gave a blurb to the book, but he wrote me a letter after the blurb.
And he just said he wanted me to know that it made him feel larger and taller to be part of the same Narrative Historical Guild as I was.
Wow.
Isn't that nice?
He's one of my dear friends.
Oh, yeah, I know.
Two quick questions.
So there's a pattern in your work.
What's next?
Well, Dick and I are going to do a book together on presidential decisions.
And what it's going to do is to take maybe 15 decisions and tell each one's story from the inside of the president.
Each one will tell a different power, like Truman firing MacArthur, Johnson getting civil rights through the Congress, Lincoln at Fort Sumter.
It really is.
I know.
He knows that internal power mechanism.
And I've spent a lot of time on the biographical side.
And then we're hoping it can become a college textbook.
Yes, I'll be home.
I'll be back very soon.
The course I taught on the presidency at Harvard, I taught that way.
It just means that instead of having to go through an analytical discussion of the powers,
You illustrate a different power by really being inside the president at that time.
Is it going to be 20th century or are you going to go back?
I think we're going to go back.
We're going to start with an opening chapter.
We have to really focus on it fully now that this one is over.
An opening chapter on all the precedents that Washington set just by being there.
And then we have to figure out Jefferson and the embargo, maybe Jackson and the Indians or the bank, Lincoln and Fort Sumter.
Oh, no, no, no.
No, it'll be, I mean, what I'm hoping is it'll be like a biography of the presidency told through these major decisions to change the office.
So it was actually not our idea.
the man who was then the head of Harper Collins now, had approached me with it about six years ago, but then I started this book, and then after we finished this one, we started talking about, well, why don't we do this?
And then just one, because you mentioned your husband, and I think maybe we can probably get a paragraph at the bottom of the story.
These are very interesting times in the Goodwin family, and you might just...
And you also mentioned that maybe you're out in California.
Well, it's so, you know... Can you give us an opportunity to bring... I understand.
I mean, what's coming together now, which is total coincidence.
I mean, people have been teasing us that this movie, in fact, the premiere came out on Monday and I was on the Today Show that Monday morning.
That's the first day of my book tour.
It's just that it took me so long to finish my book and it took him so long to make the movie that they just happened to come out.
Is that what was his role in the movie?
It's about him.
He wrote a book called Remembering America.
His first job after being a law clerk for Justice Frankfurter, before he went to work for John Kennedy as a speechwriter, his first job was to be the congressional investigator that ended up breaking this quiz show scandal.
He wrote a chapter in his memoir about his being a speechwriter for John Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson and Bobby and everything that just included this.
That's what was picked up.
It was just a small chapter in his book on the 60s
and made into a movie.
And in his chapter, it has the three-person drama that's in the movie Charles Van Doren, who's played by Ralph Kahn.
That's exactly what a... That's right, yeah.
Oh, right you see it.
It's such a wonderful movie.
I mean, I've never seen such terrific reviews.
I mean, it's really, they're saying already... I understand it's very sympathetic to Mr. Van Doren.
Yeah, I mean, what Redford did so well in the movie was to be sympathetic to all the characters and not diminish one to raise up another.
So every actor does an incredible job.
I mean, it's really...
And then the other thing that's happening at the same time is there's a documentary on baseball that's coming out that Ken Burns is doing that I'm involved in because he needed an irrational female fan.
So the nice part for me is that he's made it a father-daughter relationship, and my father died a long time ago.
My father's pictures of my father will actually be in this film.
So it makes him come back.
They even have his old name, Michael Francis, Elowish's turn.
How are you responding to this baseball thing?
The strike?
Well, that's the strike.
I mean, it's the determination.
Oh, it's terrible.
I know.
I mean, it's just... It really is.
I mean, it's just... For both those owners and the players to have that kind of...
Lack of regard for... You know what I say?
I say, and nobody has mentioned this, this is further evidence of just how tragic that that was about Jamadi was.
I agree with you.
He would have headed this off so long ago.
I think that's right.
No, I think that's right.
But he allowed these owners to become lenigate owners.
That's right.
And I just think it never would have happened.
No, I agree.
Maybe like the black spots have had to happen at one point.
So anyway, just the last thing on all this stuff coming together.
So what happened is they had a screening of the baseball premiere in Washington at the National Theater just past Saturday.
And then President Clinton had a picnic afterwards at the White House.
So where all these weird things come together, we went down and President Clinton came in.
They played Hail to the Chief.
He came into the screening.
And I was standing on the aisle because I had to give a talk at this thing.
and he came over and he shook my hand and he said, I love your book.
What was the most wonderful thing about that was mainly, not so much only that, but my 16-year-old son was standing next to me, and he's doing this, he's there with, meanwhile, there's Kirk Blood is there, and the old guy from the Negro League, and all these baseball players, so to have him share in that moment, and then he was able to go to the premiere of the baseball, I mean, of Dick's movie two nights later, so.
Hey, Paul, thank you so much for that series.
It is so wonderful.